good evening ladies and gentlemen my
name is Eva Maria I'm the Dean of
engineering here at University of
Melbourne it's real pleasure to welcome
you here to the last deans lecture of
the year today's lecture sponsored
across the Faculty of science faculty of
medicine and Faculty of engineering
because of its topic let me first start
with acknowledging the traditional
owners of the land on which the event is
taking place that is the land of the
ordinary people and we pay respect to
their elders their families past and
present so thank you for attending
tonight and given the topic may I just
remind everybody that may be better to
switch off your mobile phone whilst we
in this lecture you can switch it back
on afterwards that's right I also like
to remind people that tonight we are
videotaping and so when you're asked
questions you're automatically going to
be recorded and will take your asking
question as also a form of prevent
presenting consent with being videotaped
and audio taped let me just introduce
dr. Deborah Davis who doesn't probably
need an awful lot of introduction the
dr. Deborah Davis is a visiting
professor of medicine at the Hebrew
University Hadassah medical school and
also in Turkey at under Kuzma University
she's an expert studying doctor magnetic
radiation for mobile phones and wireless
transmitting devices at present she was
the founding director of the center for
environmental oncology which was the
first such Center in the world and was
established University of Pittsburgh
Cancer Institute and he was linking
looking at the environmental factors
that contribute to cancers in 2007 she
founded a non-profit environmental
health trust to provide basic research
and education about environmental impact
on health hazard she served as President
Clinton's appointee on the Chemical
Safety and hazard Investigation Board in
the United States
from 94 to 99 there was an independent
executive branch of the government that
investigated all the effects of chemical
accidents and how to prevent and
mitigate against them
she was also senior advisor to the
assistant secretary for health in the
Department of Health and Human Services
in the United States and as such has
counseled many leading officials in the
United States United Nations World Bank
European environmental agency the
pan-american Health Organization and the
World Bank
she holds a Bachelor of Science in
psychology a Master of Arts in sociology
she has a PhD in science from University
of Chicago and she has a master of
public health in epidemiology from the
John Hopkins University a lot of degrees
she has also smore than 200 publications
and she's been published in Lancet and
the Journal of American Medical
Association's which are some of the top
journals in the field of medical
research and she of course has
publications in Scientific American and
the New York Times every day you're very
pleased to listen to the truth about
mobile phone and wireless radiation all
thank you very much Dean mario's I'm
honored to be here it's a privilege to
see so many of you I must say I'm
thrilled to be at this great university
which has a tradition of open and
democratic discussion and I look forward
to having a frank and full conversation
as we say in the diplomatic world
because the issue I'm going to talk with
you about is there isn't one truth of
course truth is a relative term at one
point the truth was the world was flat
what we talk about truth in science of
course it's always relative but there
are now more than six billion cell
phones in the world today eight billion
wireless transmitting devices more than
50 billion are anticipated to form the
Internet of Things and we have to
recognize that we don't know a lot about
the public health and environmental
effects of this form of radiation you
have briefly you've mentioned some of my
career I won't go through this in any
great detail but I would say to you that
probably the most important thing I did
and I see many people in this room
aren't even old enough to remember it
but long time ago used to have smoke on
airplanes people could smoke tobacco on
airplanes and I was involved as a young
scientist in the committee that actually
reviewed the data and recommended that
there be no smoking on airplanes you may
be shocked to hear that it was even a
question for science at the time but it
was and when I look at what we know now
about mobile phone radiation I see some
very interesting similarities because
there were a lot of questions that were
raised about the safety of tobacco on
airplanes and they were in fact
legitimate questions things we did not
know there are a lot of important
questions to be asked about mobile phone
radiation today without any doubt but
the reality is we're not asking those
questions and with the exception of some
researchers here and elsewhere very
little new research is being done in
this field so it's a thrill to be here
because Australia has been a leader in
research in the field of Electrical
Engineering and it's applications to
medicine doing some of the most exciting
work in the world and funded by
institutions around the world including
the US Department of Defense and I've
worked at some of the
up institutions in the world in science
and so when I first thought there could
be something wrong with mobile phones I
actually owned three phones at the time
I owned two now and I everybody has to
downsize a bit and I didn't believe
there was a problem and I thought if
there were a problem I would know about
it because of course I knew all about
was important in science well I was
wrong I liked the fact that I could call
people or actually send them messages
and expect an answer at all hours of the
day and found it kind of fun in the
beginning and when somebody said to me
there could be a problem with this with
our health I said oh don't be ridiculous
if there was a problem I'd know about it
well I was wrong and what I now know is
that information is being sent to people
routinely to give them safety
information I'm going to ask you to help
me out here by looking at how many of
you have an iPhone now I assume you
didn't all turn them off so for those
who have an iPhone would you not raise
your hand again I'd like you to share
with your colleagues
so please go to the settings on your
phone right please take a moment and nod
when you've got there
all right and be prepared to share
alright go to settings on the phone got
there all right now get to settings now
go to about I'm sorry you have to go to
general first there's a mistake here I
have to go to general alright under
general under settings then go to about
which is at the top you got there about
yes okay now you have to scroll all the
way down to something you don't normally
see called legal you have to legal all
right now click on RF exposure now you
can read it later but it's basically
telling you that you need to know that
you can not keep the phone directly next
to your body without exceeding the
as-tested exposure guidelines and by the
way the iPhone does it I happen to know
how to find it on the iPhone I'm just
learning the Android system myself but
all smartphones come with some
information that basically says don't
keep the phone in your pocket or you
will exceed the as-tested exposure
guidelines now how many of you knew that
before today well this is very well
informed audience relative to others
I want to thank Telstra because they
actually are now giving people this
information and by the way they're one
of the first telecom companies in the
world to do this so I actually think
it's a good thing they're sending this
message how many of you have seen it how
many of you have actually looked at what
it's said well here's what it says this
is what it says and like most of you I
found messages like this annoying but
the reality is Telstra is telling you to
use a hands-free device to keep a mobile
phone away from the head and body to
reduce mobile phone exposure so that's a
good thing
but on the other hand I think that we
all need to do better to give people
information so that you have knowledge
about how to reduce exposure and I'm
going to explain to you why we need to
reduce exposure
go back to almost 20 years ago when
standards for cell phones were first set
up at that time it was believed that the
only thing you had to worry about was
avoiding heat that was the only effect
you had to be concerned about and so
they employed the head of a very large
person a 220-pound male who was at the
top 98 percentile of military recruits
in 1989 the United States and they set
the standards to avoid heating up that
fellow's brain after a six-minute phone
call now there's probably one or two
people in this room with a head that
size but the rest of you like most of
the world have much smaller heads and
relatively smaller bodies and this
standard which is very much out of date
doesn't take into account the fact that
people the size of these two bright
young people here in the front row are
using these devices today with no
thought that maybe they're getting
exposed to levels of radiation that have
not been evaluated for their safety in
young developing brains now the Electra
Matic Spectrum this is information from
ARPANSA
actually goes all the way from the
invisible to the visible ionizing
radiation gamma rays x-rays over here
and light here this is from our pond so
you will see here they say FM radio
microwave oven
radiant heat of course microwave oven
actually happens to be of the same
frequency as the cell phone the mobile
phone a mobile phone and the microwave
oven use a very similar frequency the
difference between them is power the
power of the microwave oven is a
thousand watts and of course that's
power that can heat up a cup of water in
maybe 60 seconds the microwave oven the
mobile phone the cordless phone the
Wi-Fi monitor the baby monitor they all
use the same frequency they differ in
power
they also differ because mobile phones
and Wi-Fi devices emit pulsed microwave
radiation it's the pulse not the power
that appears to be biologically most
important the pulse that is erratic and
irregular like for thousands of minutes
a month for dozens of hours a week over
a lifetime that irregular pulsed signal
may be much more biologically important
and in fact the continuous wave signals
have a lot of therapeutic effects as are
being applied in medicine today this
visualization from my colleague at the
University of Athens shows you the
variation in frequency in amplitude in
pulse all of these variables influence
the properties a signal have and how it
can affect a biological system this is
just to show you what happens in a
four-second mobile phone call this is
power density power density indicated
here and of course a phone is on standby
it's not doing too much but 900 times a
minute it's looking to for a signal it
says the tower where are you here I am
where are you here I am it's smart
that's how it's supposed to do now
when the phone rings the worst time for
you to put a phone right next to your
head is when you answer it and say hello
because it's smart and it goes to max
power they're programmed to do that max
power now it's going to go to max power
you're going to listen and then it will
go up and down and up and down and again
it's that variation it's the Delta it's
the cumulative integrative dose under
the curve over a lifetime exposure that
looks to be biologically important now
exposure is the kind of funny thing
there's a rather widely distributed
paper by Ken Foster and CK Cho that said
that the exposure of an adult and the
exposure of a
child is identical and therefore there's
no real difference in how the radiation
might be affecting them well let me
explain something by showing off my
daughter and my granddaughter
my granddaughter is a very light-skinned
red hair blue-eyed child her skin is
very sensitive
my daughter is darker haired like I am
if they have sunscreen on they still
will get a different dose of ultraviolet
light even though they have the same
exposure because the exposure may be
uniform but the amount they will absorb
differs because the properties of the
skin the property of the eye the
thinness of the skin and a number of
other variables and those same things
are relevant when it comes to thinking
about cell phone radiation now way back
in the dark ages
when the standards were developed two
dimensional modeling showed that
children and smaller adults might absorb
more radiation than larger adults and
this was scalar modeling that has now
been superseded done by ohm Gandhi in
1996 interestingly and this is why I'm
really delighted to be here Dean when he
did this work in 1996 he was working
with support from Motorola and the
Department of Defense and after he
published this he lost all his funding
that's why I'm really happy when you
told me that Australia is not America
because I think you have an opportunity
to do something here in this great
country you have a tradition of
Independence in science and in this
country that we do not have
unfortunately on this issue in the
United States so professor Gandhi with
whom I'm collaborating now updated his
work in 2002 here showing you that a
smaller adult head here you see the
amount of exposure is this is quite
similar but because the head is smaller
it will absorb proportionally more Mork
recently we have been working with
colleagues at
Allegro with environmental health trust
and we have developed three-dimensional
modeling with anatomically based models
using MRI to create the models with one
millimetre voxels and what we have done
is to show the difference in radiation
dose in heads of different ages and
sizes and I'll just show you one example
here coming from our koalas at the Swiss
National Institute of Technology the IT
is which are have produced some of the
most brilliant work in the world in this
field and they have shown here of course
that there is going to be greater
exposure absorption into a younger head
versus an older head this is another
item from their website of target tissue
dose for the infant with using a system
called the virtual family is there
anyone here who's worked on the virtual
family right it's it's a really powerful
and very sophisticated system that is
used today to set standards for medical
devices and surgical procedures but it's
not used for mobile phone standards I
find that odd and I want to show you an
example of some of the work that we are
doing now that I'm releasing here for
the first time and this is a model
microwave radiation dose of a
six-year-old with greater levels to the
frontal and temporal lobes eyes and
cheek and watch this here now yellow
white and red are the hottest alright
and if you look carefully you will see
it's going into the eye the nose do it
again just so you'll get to see it and
partly into the brainstem now that's
just showing you that there's going to
be some exposure into that area of a
young head it doesn't tell you that
there's any biological effect right now
the next slide is going to show you
something that might be of interest to
students and faculty here
and that has to do with exposure to the
reproductive organs we call them the
gonads I think you say the testicles and
bone marrow and look here at the
radiation as it gets into the groin area
and that's just from having a mobile
phone modeled into the pocket and this
again is based on normalized SAR with a
dipole antenna and there are many
different variables you can alter in
coming up with this kind of simulation
right the number of antenna whether it's
gsm cdma whether it's simultaneously
operating only one antenna or more than
one but we believe that this is the kind
of work that needs to be done and that
this institution might be in a position
to do it and my colleagues from Brazil
would be happy to share with you the
modeling that we have done to date to
generate this but based on this work and
other studies that have been done around
the world the United States magazine
Consumer Reports recently recommended
that nobody keep a phone in their pocket
nobody and in fact if phones were tested
in pockets they would exceed the
as-tested exposure guidelines which is
why telstra has recently issued that
advice now when it comes to pregnancy
we're working with Yale University and
more than a hundred physicians and
experts in the United States and around
the world who are specialists in
pregnancy and we have been modeling
exposure to the head at the end of
pregnancy and at the end of pregnancy
when of course the head as any woman
here knows is right at the surface if
you're lucky it's at the surface and
it's not facing the spine then you can
get the greatest exposure because of
course the skin is completely permeable
to this radiation exposure and that's
why we've developed the baby safe
project with colleagues at Yale to
advise pregnant women to protect their
abdomens from mobile phone radiation
as well as from iPads which I should add
iPads and other devices are called
tablets because they belong on tables
they are tested 20 centimeters away from
that big guy that I showed you before 20
centimeters away they are not approved
to be held in the laps of little
children although millions of kids are
having them now in schools because the
people involved in educational
technology and those involved in public
health research are not talking to one
another
because if they were they would
understand that you're giving children a
two-way microwave radiating device and
if you must give them such a device for
learning purposes put it on airplane
mode so that it's not sending and
receiving signals as it does otherwise
now this is some new modeling again that
we've developed with colleagues in
Brazil and we can share with you how
we've done it it's we first start out
with the MRI and create the model with
one millimetre voxels and this is quite
a bit of work goes into creating this
and here is what it looks like after a
period of 6 minutes that's really not as
bad as it might look because you see the
red area only gets partway through the
eye of the adult right the one that
we're really concerned about is this one
with the young child and this is a three
year old brain that we modelled and you
see that by the end of that six minute
call the peak radiation yellow and red
is is is getting all the way into almost
both eyes and again this is one call and
it's not going to kill anybody
and may not cause any biological effect
whatsoever for one call or two calls or
three calls but the question is what's
the cumulative impact of this kind of
exposure how do we evaluate it how do we
study
the problem we face is that right now
we're in the midst of an experiment on
my grandchildren and your children and
we don't have anybody to compare them
with we don't have a control group in
science when you are given a drug it's
usually been studied where some people
get the drug and some people don't get
the drug and they're called the controls
and then you see whether or not those
who got the drug are healthier than
those who did not and when you get
results you can conclude if there is a
difference between the exposed and the
control group that your drug has worked
well when it comes to mobile phone
radiation we've lost our ability to have
a true control group they even now with
young children more than half of young
children today have access to these
devices and I read this morning in the
age that something like 13% of children
aged 2 can order their own apps I mean
III can't I find it hard to imagine how
a parent would give a child age to a
device which was allowing them to order
their own app so where are we with
respect to research on infants toddlers
and young children and pregnancy well
there's almost no research underway
which again is why I'm delighted to be
here to talk with you about what could
be developed believe it or not this is
the I potty
now it's not a joke I have actually
talked to grandmothers I'm one of them
my grandchildren did not have an iPod II
I promise you
their father sometimes acts like he did
a lot of people today take devices into
the bathroom all the time
but there are actually young children
who will not go to the potty without
their iPad does anybody know anybody
like that any kids
yes is that amazing and nobody's even
thinking about about this as what it
might mean for for radiation exposure
and parent magazine called the iPad the
best babysitter I mean if you need an
iPad for a babysitter you need to
rethink having children I understand I
understand giving cranky children
something to distract them on a long car
trip but please put it on airplane mode
don't think that you're doing something
good for your child if you hand them a
device and it's a two-way microwave
radio now I want to show you something
that you may find hard to believe but of
course anybody who's been around babies
lately knows that this is what they do
with anything you give them that's how
they learn things they put them in their
mouths but this is something that you
have to watch to believe it
NATO may be familiar to some of you and
NATO for years has supported research on
radar radar of course gave birth to the
microwave oven how many of you know that
okay the first microwave oven was called
a radar range the guys figured out that
they could cook things with radar and
they thought it was pretty cool
they actually discovered it because when
guys would be standing on the deck and
it was cold at night they would warm
themselves in front of the radar and if
they had chocolate in their pocket it
would melt so that's how they decided to
figure out what would happen if you
beamed radar at things like hot dogs and
corn and soon enough that gave birth to
the radar range
but women didn't like the idea of
cooking with radar guys thought it was
pretty cool so they'd reach in deled the
name to microwave it sounded dainty and
more palatable and nowadays a microwave
oven is a staple around the world
experimental studies have been supported
by NATO on radar for years and one of
the laboratories they've supported is
that of Professor Nezzer and sahaan and
her colleagues and environmental health
trust convened an international
conference with her laboratory partners
and the Ministry of Health of Turkey in
2011 and I want to show you briefly some
of the work that that developed from
that laboratory this is showing you
cellular damage that occurred in animals
that were prenatally exposed to mobile
phone radiation that was produced by a
computer simulating the mobile phone
exposure under controlled conditions
right so because you can't really get
rats to make phone calls you've got a
model the exposure
and what they did is they then they
measured in these are your controls that
you compare things with and these were
the exposed prenatally exposed just 15
minutes a day for seven days not much
exposure but these are small animals and
they grow within three weeks they
produce and what they were able to study
was changes in liver Milland aldehyde
which is a measure of peroxidation is
the measure of damage to the liver right
so these animals basically had
significant damage to their liver if
they had been exposed prenatally
compared to controls now another group
in Turkey has looked at prenatal effects
on the brain and the testes and you know
a lot of countries this is a very
important research that has been done
here and they looked at counting the
number of cells in certain areas of the
brain the hippocampus which is a
critically important part of the brain
and since I see there's a lot of
non-expert here and let me just explain
that your hippocampus is pretty
important to things like memory balance
things like that so studying effects on
the hippocampus in animals is kind of a
good way to anticipate effects that
might develop on intelligence and and
other things and he looked at newborn
rats after they had been exposed
prenatally and compared those who were
exposed to those who were not exposed
and they looked at their brain cells the
number of cells shape etc with
established methods for testing this and
this article was published in brain
research which is a relatively high
impact Journal and what they showed was
that prenatally exposed newborns have
basically fewer cells in the hippocampus
here's the exposed missings themselves
and here are the controls which they're
compared with and you can see here that
these cells are there's more of them
here they're more scattered and in fact
they did another test of memory now how
do you test memory in an atom
you don't have them fill out the
crossword puzzle you test memory and an
animal with well-established protocols
of learning you teach them to run a maze
and get a food reward and you see how
long it takes them to do that and what
they did is a radial arm maze they
trained these animals who were starving
to get a food reward right and after
they did that they then saw how long did
it take them to learn this if they had
been prenatally exposed to mobile phone
radiation and what they found was that
newborns that had been exposed took
three times as long to find their way
out of the experimental maze and made
twice as many errors and this again it's
a statistically valid method for
evaluation learning now closer to home
so to speak between the brain and the
testers studies have been done here in
Australia at Newcastle by a fellow who's
now the pro Chancellor of the University
and these studies have been done taking
sperm from healthy men and one test tube
gets exposed to cellphone radiation and
one test tube is not exposed to mobile
phone radiation and then the results are
evaluated and this is a measure of
vitality we measure how well the sperm
swim this is a measure of mobility
motility this is a measure of the
mitochondrial DNA damage they have three
times as much damage on their DNA if
they have been exposed to mobile phone
radiation as compared to controls and
now the issue is why does it take a half
a billion sperm to make just one healthy
baby it takes a lot of sperm to make a
healthy baby the answer is because sperm
don't know how to ask for directions
but they are easy to study and these
research has been done in India in the
United States at the Cleveland Clinic
and around the world so many different
studies have been done on sperm damage
at OCA with mobile phone radiation that
in the seventh edition of the textbook
biostatistics in medicine
Stanton glance concludes that the
evidence linking mobile phone radiation
to sperm damage is causal meaning there
clearly is a cause of damage to sperm
for mobile phone radiation now it's we
have a lot of uncertainties in this
field the truth is we have a lot of
uncertainties but not about sperm there
the evidence has become rather strong
and it's become clear so clear that the
Indian government has issued warnings
about this that clinics that deal with
reproductive problems are routinely
advising young men to get those phones
out of their pockets recognizing that
this is a hidden hazard to healthy
reproduction this is the data from the
Cleveland Clinic showing that men who
keep cell phones in their pockets the
longest have the lowest sperm count and
again there are many other studies with
similar results so we can debate
legitimately the question of brain
cancer and I would welcome an open and
honest debate about that question but
when it comes to issues like this there
really is not much to debate and it's
interesting that the research on this
issue comes from people who are expert
in male fertility who started to treat
men at infertility clinics and noticed
that this was a major contributor to
their fertility problems now
experimental studies have been done also
in India to confirm this kind of damage
not just looking at prenatal exposure or
early early life exposure but taking
middle aged rats 70 day old male rats
that's middle age for rat and exposing
them to hours a day for 45 days to a
computer-generated mo
phone signal and those results show
lower testosterone which is a very
important hormone for a male men and
women both have testosterone men just
need a lot more of it and also increases
of DNA damage as measured by certain
enzymes and the and the offspring had
lower fertility and this is just to show
you this is a normal test this you see
the boundaries the cell wall looks very
nice and this is after microwave
radiation exposure so it's pretty it's
there are some pretty stunning images
that have been generated in the basic
biology literature when it comes to
these kinds of effects now the breast
the breast is mostly fat contains a lot
of fluid things that contain flat and
fluid cook faster in the microwave oven
now a cell phone can't cook anything
right mobile phones do not pop popcorn
that was a fraud they don't make any
heat that we know of otherwise they
wouldn't be permitted but they do go
through things that contain fat and
fluid and we are now working an
environmental health trust with
scientists at the University of
California San Francisco scientists at
formerly the president of the American
Cancer Society of California because we
are seeing women who keep cell phones in
their bras has anyone seen a woman put a
cell phone in her bra hands up please
please tell them you've heard now why
they shouldn't do that and here I want
to show you our first case report from
2009 and we now have many more this was
a chinese-american woman a Chinese
American woman who used her cell phone
for hours a day in her bra for 10 years
while she was driving now and you drive
with a with a phone on your body the
phone is smart it's going to go from one
tower to another and it's going to say
Here I am where are you here I am and
it's going to be going to max power each
time it moves from one cell tower to
another and there it was right next to
her chest and the tumors that developed
developed right under the antenna of the
phone unusual tumors well you know
that's a very good question does it
apply to males who would put the phone
in their breast pocket we actually have
cases now of men with unusual skin
cancers or unusual growth where they've
kept their phone in one place and again
if they were test phones would not be
passed testing approval if they if they
were to do that male breast cancer is
very rare very very rare but we are
seeing some reports of cases and here
unfortunately this is a an MRI of a
young woman very brave young woman named
Tiffany France when she was 21 she's now
22 she developed metastatic breast
cancer
this is metastases into her chest wall
right here and this is outlined the
phone and it was subcutaneous so it's
like right under the surface of the skin
it was it was not deep within the breast
most breast cancer occurs in women over
50 it occurs in the upper outer quadrant
these tumors occurred right under the
antennae of the phone and now we have 38
of them not a single one of them has a
family history none of them has
inherited the defects that we know
increase the risk of breast cancer
they have multifocal tumours that means
they have more than one tumor and the
tumors are located under the antennae
sometimes just right in the center of
the chest so we're collecting
information because that's what we do in
science but we want to in the meantime
issue precautionary advice because
that's also what we do in public health
when it comes to setting public policy
when it comes to further work on the
prenatal impacts my colleagues at Yale
University have taken mice exposed them
to mobile phone radiation and they have
found significant effects on
those mices behavior as adults all right
prenatally exposed mice have
hyperactivity as adults and these are
some of the data they have worse memory
they're more hyperactive they have more
anxiety but they don't have much fear
it's kind of interesting and because of
that that is why we've developed the
baby safe project working with
colleagues at Yale University and around
the world now how many of you had heard
that in 2011 the World Health
Organization had reviewed all of the
evidence and decided that mobile phone
radiation was a possible human
carcinogen how many people had heard
that okay it's interesting that that
information isn't more widely known and
we can explore the reasons for that
perhaps at a later time but the fact is
the group that reviewed this evidence
for the World Health Organization looked
at all the evidence at the time in 2011
and at that time they said it's
important to conduct additional research
and it's important to take pragmatic
measures to reduce exposure now that's
why it's wonderful that Telstra is
giving this advice but we are not
conducting additional research and in
fact the World Health Organization
itself is no longer conducting a leading
study on brain cancer and mobile phones
environmental health trust the
organization that I had published an
article in 2013 saying that we think
that mobile phone radiation is a
probable human carcinogen and I want to
show you briefly the reasons why we
reach that conclusion these are studies
published since the World Health
Organization IRC review in 2011 so these
are relative ease our newer studies here
har Dell
from sweden and sarah not from france
and what these are showing you is that
the relative risk of developing brain
cancer with more than 16 hundred and
forty hours of lifetime use of a phone
is almost three times higher compared to
people who did not use mobile phones now
this I know this seems like very
confusing these numbers don't make a lot
of sense to many of you but really the
way you get these numbers is it's like
waiting for the grass to grow you study
people who have brain cancer and you
compare them with people who don't have
brain cancer but they're otherwise
similar they're your controls and you
compare the people with brain cancer to
those don't have the disease and you ask
well do you remember whether you talked
on the phone it's not a very precise
science actually there's a lot of
problems with what are called exposure
miss classification it biases you toward
the null hypothesis the reality is it's
a very poor way of doing research but we
don't have an alternative at this point
and what we need to do is to get the
cooperation of telecom industry to get
billing records so we actually have real
data instead of asking people to
remember how much they use their phone
that's something that again you might be
able to do in Australia but I can tell
you we can't do it in the United States
that's for sure in France they were able
to do it a little bit better and they
were able to get these data here and
interestingly if people started to use
phones regularly before age 20 as most
of the world is doing now
there was four to eight times more brain
cancer after they reached had past ten
years so now why is there no increase in
brain cancer that we can find in the
general population today because there
is not and after all if mobile phones
really are important why don't we have
an epidemic today well let me tell you
why first of all brain cancer takes a
long time to
develop how do we know that we know that
because when the bombs fell at the end
of World War two there was no increase
in brain cancer in the survivors who had
been studied no increase at all until
forty years had passed it took 40 years
for an increase in brain cancer to show
up in that highly exposed population now
think about this today the number of
people using cellphones today and using
them heavily today is very different
than it was even five years ago even
three years ago now you're being
encouraged to have unlimited talk and
text right you didn't have unlimited
talk and text five years ago or ten
years ago
so the uses and the users of phones are
changing radically in fact most
epidemiologic studies find no increased
risk of brain cancer from mobile phone
radiation they don't until 10 years of
heavy use and by the way the way they
define a cell phone user in these
studies I'm not making this up is
somebody who makes one call a week for
six months yes that's this that wasn't
yes one call a week for six months that
was the definition in these studies
which by the way don't find any increase
all right so I'm not saying this to say
that they did a bad job I'm saying that
we are challenged here with how do you
do a study of something that's rapidly
changing while you're studying it the
technology has changed the way people
have used it has changed we never
anticipated having infants and toddlers
and cribs using these things nobody ever
anticipated that there's never been any
modeling of the brain until we did this
right now and when I first stood my
colleagues by the way took us four years
to get this work done on four years ago
I said let's let's do that modeling and
they said what are you talking about why
would anybody want to model an infant or
a three-year-old using a mobile phone I
said you wait unfortunately
and so now we have a market because the
adult market is saturated Australia
already has more phones than people it
does and so the market expands to the
infants and toddlers now I want to share
with you some of the work from my
colleagues in India dr. Sharma is the
senior deputy director-general of the
Indian Council medical research and this
work
Malka I think will be a great interest
to you because you work on honeybees we
don't just have to wait for brain cancer
to take 40 years to come up with answers
honeybees have the advantage of being
relatively easy to study and there
actually are established protocols for
doing this and I'm going to share with
you some of these data and they have
been developed by colleagues from a
number of countries honeybees have
different characteristic dance patterns
and they have different jobs
there's the worker bees and there's the
bees that make the honey and there's the
bees that protect the Queen and I don't
know all the details but here's what I
do know if you try to study these under
controlled conditions you can take hives
and put a mobile phone in some highs and
a mobile phone and other hives that's
not on and what you can find is that
after exposing the honeybees to an
operating mobile phone the workers don't
come back to the hives
now this ought to be of great concern
because agriculture depends on honeybees
I think you in Australia have a new
business that's developed I know it in
the United States where people drive
trucks around with hives in it to
fertilize crops have you heard of this
they drive them around because the
honeybees are disappearing now there are
many different factors that affect
honeybees climate is certainly one
pesticides is certainly another but
mobile phone radiation could be yet
another and we certainly need to find
out if that is the case
ten minutes of mobile phone radiation
daily for 10 days worker bees did not
return to test colonies and this would
be something that could easily be
replicated so now we have to deal with
reality there are many inconsistent
results I'm not just skimming the cream
here and showing you the positive ones
there are a lot of studies that find
nothing at all nothing why well first of
all sometimes they study different cell
cultures so if you're looking for adult
cells they may be much more robust than
if you're looking at neuronal stem cells
and that turns out to be the case
sometimes they're using different
exposures if you're looking at
continuous wave versus digital pulse
signals if you're looking at a square
wave versus a sine wave
there's also another fact we have to
talk about which is yet another reason
why I'm glad that Australia is not
America sponsored research this is to
put it politely can induce publication
bias another way to say this is that
where you stand on an issue depends on
where you sit and who's bought your
chair and there's a tremendous amount of
sponsored research by people who are
hired to do studies to find no effect
and that's plagued this field in a
number of countries including within the
government itself including within the
government itself so I don't know about
the details here with ARPANSA but I can
tell you in the United States today the
gentleman who is directing the Federal
Communications Commission Tom wheeler
was for 10 years the executive director
of the cellphone telecommunications
industry association and now he's in
charge of regulating those devices so
it's challenging to have a neutral
playing field under that circumstance
one example the US Congress asked for
study of what needed to be done
on mobile phone radiation in 1993 in
1998 in 2002 in 2012 that's how many
times they've asked for that study to be
done so each time a study is done and
each time the conclusion is reached we
need more research we need more research
well that's my bread and butter of
course we need more research but if
instead of funding the research all
you're doing is calling for it then it
becomes a bit of a smokescreen so that's
part of our challenge on this issue it's
a lot easier to call for research than
it is to carry it out this research is
hard to do it's not simple there are
real complexities to this field
unfortunately at least in the past
industry had a very clear strategy and
in my book disconnect I document and
quote in the new afterword that in 1994
when industry first became aware that
there were studies suggesting that
mobile phone radiation could damage
brain cells of rats a memo was written
to quote war - game the science war game
the science this issue is far too
important to be gamed it's not a matter
of war it's a matter of the future
health of your children and
grandchildren and that's why it's really
a special honor for me to be here today
to talk with you about what could be
done here are some of the policy
responses that have developed so far
there are right - no laws and policies
labeling is spreading headsets must be
provided with all phones in a number of
countries and I'll get to those in a
moment
there are changes in Hardware and
antenna design and software operating
systems that
can be developed and there are also
changes to what we demand for proof of
evidentiary burden any lawyers here
right so the evidentiary burden that's
being required for proof of harm is is
is changing do you really want to have
to prove that there's a significant
increased risk of brain cancer
before taking steps to reduce exposures
to prevent that harm from happening
that's really the question how much
evidence do we need before taking
precautionary steps and that's what
brings me back to my days at the
National Academy of Sciences when we
seriously looked at the evidence on
passive smoke and airplane travel we
only finally took steps to act when it
became clear that children of smokers
were hospitalized more often that was
the evidence that that we had to have
and I would suggest that at this point
we should be able to do better as a
civilization we start with we need
standardized ways to evaluate things
there is no standardized metric that's
something you could develop at this
school in particular one of the other
things that can be done which our
colleagues in India are doing is to
create cross-sectional surveys in this
room right now you can divide this room
up into people who are high medium and
low cellphone users it's probably nobody
who doesn't have a phone or who will
admit to it right now but if you did
look at people cross sectionally and you
looked at their memory and their
reaction time and their reproductive
health you would learn a lot from that
and they are doing that now in India and
we'll talk some more about that in my
conversations that I'll have with some
of the faculty later on in the meantime
some schools are promoting wired school
programs with shared banks of computers
and public educational efforts are
really proceeding to let people know you
shouldn't have to find that information
buried inside your phone I mean come on
that's not fair
parents teachers and health
professionals should be informed and
they in turn can work with students to
make sure people are using technology in
a safe away as possible now here's some
of the other policies that have been
developed in France there's a ban on
advertising to young children under age
12 by the way all cell phones have to be
sold with earpieces there has to be
labeling of the specific absorption rate
on phones and there's got to be warnings
in India they've lowered their tower
limits to 1/10 that of the international
standards and they have official
guidelines for cell phone use using
headsets and speaker phones the Supreme
Court in India has actually ordered a
number of towers to be torn down but
it's it's a very tough battle to have to
fight rather than having to get a tower
torn down there ought to be siting rules
and policies that make sense and in many
countries there are no real sensible
siting policies Israel which is a
country that has a lot of important
issues to deal with right now has a
National Institute on non ionizing
radiation they say no Wi-Fi in
kindergarten they all prefer wired over
wireless in schools all phones again are
to come with headsets and safety and no
advertising with children in Belgium the
law has been implemented as of 2014 it
was passed in 2013 no phones are to be
designed or sold for children under the
age of 7 again all handsets must be sold
with headsets and the sale to young
children is specifically prohibited
prohibited Canada has issued practical
advice as well and I don't go intending
more details here these slides will
become available on the website for the
University and we have much more
detailed information I can share with
you from our website as well
the Canadian parliamentary Health
Committee has urged that there be a
recognition that this is a quote serious
serious public health issue
and we agree and I testified before the
Canadian Parliament on this issue and I
was pleased to see their report agree
with that point now in the United States
a US District Court has recently ruled
that even if there is a reasonable
possibility that cell phone radiation is
carcinogenic the time for action in the
Public Health and regulatory sectors is
upon us
and I think that that is a very
important idea that we should all be
aware of let's not debate the kinds of
evidence we have now about brain cancer
I agree that evidence can be debated but
we have enough evidence of damage and we
have these other countries have taken
steps now they can't all be dismissed
Berkeley California has unanimously
passed the cellphone right-to-know law
it's called an ordinance requiring
notification that if you carry your
phone in your pants or shirt pocket or
tucked into a bra when the phone is on
you may exceed the federal guidelines
for exposure to RF radiation this is a
website that has all of the fine print
warnings so far as we know them
available Environmental Health Trust is
working with others to share this
information we hope you'll share it with
all of your friends and family this is
the baby safe project that we have
underway and now just so you understand
that this is not a question of being
anti industry here's what industry is
doing Vodafone has to provide a report
to the American government as part of
their annual reporting to the Security
and Exchange Commission they must report
on what are called risk factors and
uncertainties and they report that they
face risks
because they may have to pay people for
health damages the last sentence there a
change to this view that there's no
health problem could result in a major
reduction in phone usage or major
litigation that's a risk China Mobile in
their reports the US Securities and
Exchange Commission they had to say we
cannot be certain that future studies
will not impute a link between
electromagnetic fields and adverse
health effects and because of that it's
a potential risk as well AT&T says
unfavorable litigation could result and
require us to pay significant amounts of
money well speaking of money would you
give two cents would you pay two cents a
month for every device you have for
every provider for every manufacturer in
order to support the cross-disciplinary
training program that is needed in bio
electromagnetics for engineers and
physicians and computer scientists
that's what's needed to identify the
data gaps the research and development
needs to monitor the populations to see
what is happening to our children today
to look at hearing and memory and sperm
count that's what I think we need we
need a major program to fund independent
research and training because I learned
this way way after I went to all that
schooling you mentioned at the beginning
and it's not easy stuff to do I hold my
head off to all of you electrical
engineers it's complicated but in the
meantime people have a right to know how
you can minimize exposure and again I
think this information is available on
our website will be a vase available on
yours
remember if you have to give a phone to
a child
put it on airplane mode and think about
this that microwave oven it works
because there's a metal box around the
microwave signal and the signal pings
all over the place next time you get
into an elevator or a train for any
length of time put your phone on
airplane mode
otherwise that signals going all over
the place magnifying and coming back
keep the mobile phone away from you when
it's on and you are asleep now it takes
a village to do a lot of things these
are some of the people whose materials
I've used today with their permission
and I can't read this list to you but I
want you to know that I feel really
honored to be working with some of the
most challenged people in the world on
this issue and they have given me
permission to share these materials with
you and I leave you with this thought
and from Albert Einstein the world is
not dangerous because of those who do
harm but because of those who look at it
without doing anything so thank you